README.md, before:

# React Presentation Components

In this lesson, we will examine a specific "type" of React component known as a
"presentation" or "presentational" component.

By the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

1. Explain the benefits of presentation components
2. Describe how we can add interactivity to presentational components
   by adding a callback function as a prop
3. Explain how to use stateless functional components

# What makes a component "presentational"?

The answer to this question is, as you may have guessed, is that a presentational
component is a component whose primary responsibility is to render some piece
of the beautiful user interfaces that we get to build as web developers. Their
job, in other words, is to look good!

![I'm So Pretty](https://media.giphy.com/media/oLz0TmduZsUjm/giphy.gif)

There is, however, a bit more thinking that we need to do here, just so we
understand precisely what it means when we say that a component is of the type
"presentational." Very often
when we speak of classes or categories of things in world of programming, the types or
classes that we are discussing are actually formalized in the libraries or
languages themselves. Think, for example, of when we declare a React `Component.`
When we do that we write either `React.createClass()` or (using the ES2015 format)
`class SomeComponent extends Component`. Either way, we are creating an actual
instance of `Component`.

But here's the rub. When we say that some component is "presentational" *we
definitely do not mean* that the component is a formal type or class defined
by the React library. There is no such thing as type `PresentationalComponent`
in the React library. Rather, what we are dealing with here is simply a useful
*convention*, or, better yet, a *programming pattern* that coders who have used
React have found themselves following over and over again as they compose
their component-based React UIs.

So what defines the presentational component pattern? Here's a list
of defining features:
* Presentational components are primarily concerned with how things look;
* they probably only contain a render method;
* they do not know how to load or alter the data that they render;
* they rarely have any internally changeable `state` properties;
* and, they are best written as stateless functional components.

Okay so there's our pattern description. Now let's jump into some code and see
how presentation components actually look in practice.

## Surprise, You've already written presentational components!

Yep, this is true. Think about it. If a presentational component is simply
a component that doesn't know anything about how to get the data it displays,
and is mainly responsible for presentation, then you've been doing this from
the beginning. A simple `HelloWorld` component, for example, is almost
certainly presentational. Let's see if that's right &mdash; we'll even give our
component the ability to take a prop:

```javascript
const HelloWorld = React.createClass({
  render: function() {
    return <div class="hello-world">Hello {this.props.message || 'World' }</div>;
  }
})
```

Okay, so does this fit our pattern? Absolutely, it does. Here is a component
that does nothing but render a piece of our UI; that has no notion of how
to fetch or reload the `message` data that it takes in as a `prop`; that has
no changeable state; and that only contains a render method. So, I think we can 
safely say it's pretty well presentational.

## Okay great, but when would we ever need such a simple component?

Good question! Our `HelloWorld` example is obviously not a very real-world example,
but consider this: let's say we are working on a massive web application, and we'd
 like to standardize as well as place some limits on the characteristics of the 
text inputs used throughout the application's forms.

In this case, we could certainly establish a style guide in our development team
that dictates that all uses of `<input>` use a specific set of CSS classes, defined
in our stylesheets, but this leaves our app open to a lot of human error. People
would have to consistently follow the convention over time. And while we could
certainly add props to our inputs by doing something like this --
`<input className='field' {...props}>` -- we've left the types of props that can
be provided to our inputs wide open.

With React, we can do much better! Consider this `TextField` component:

```javascript
const defaultLimit = 100
const noop = () => {}

export default class TextField extends React.Component {
  render() {
    // Assume that we have the css classes defined elsewhere.
    return <input
             className="field field-light"
             onChange={this.props.onChange || noop}
             maxLength={this.props.limit || defaultLimit} />
  }
}
```

First off, notice that here again, what we have a component that
fits the presentational pattern. It's a simple wrapper around an `<input>`. But
look how powerful it is! This simple wrapper establishes the CSS classes we will
use in one place for every single input used throughout the app. Think of how
easy it would be to change if we later decided we wanted a different look! But
that's not all we've accomplished here. The component also establishes a
straightforward API for all our text fields consisting of an `onChange` callback
-- because in most cases our `<input>`s are going to need to perform some action
when the users type -- and a `limit` for the amount of characters that a user
can enter in the field. So although our presentational component is simple, it
can still have a degree of interactivity through the addition of callbacks.

Now, of course, we can argue about whether wrapping the `<input>` field in this
way is a good idea. After all, `<input>`s are nice simple implementations in their
own right. But providing a component-based interface to text inputs as we have in
the field above is potentially a great win for simplicity in our app. It specifically
defines what we mean by a text input; it does so in a way that arguably covers
the majority of use-cases we can imagine for a simple text input; and it provides
this definition in one place that can be found and updated easily in the future.
Win, win, win. Are we beginning to see the power off presentational components? 
Good.

Now imagine that it's not just the `TextField` that our team has executed
in this way, but say we've also defined a `<Header />` and a `<Footer />`, as
well, of course, as other more unique and customized modules that are still
primarily presentational. Imagine further that we've composed the majority of our
UI out of these simple presentational components -- all of them almost entirely
stateless, all of them designed to do one thing and one thing well: they just
receive `props` from their parent components and render! That's it. They are
simple and beautiful and because they aren't doing much, because they are mostly
stateless, they have a better chance of remaining blissfully bug free!

This is the power and importance of presentational components. They are simple
and they just work. So therefore we should strive to use them as much as possible.

## The "Stateless Functional" Component & "Pure" Functions

What if I told you we can actually make our presentational components even
simpler? Well we can, and here's why: Remember how one of the principles in
our checklist for the presentational component pattern was that the component
(probably) does not have state? Well, if in fact we can create a component
that has no state, that means that our component doesn't even really need to be
a Javascript object of type `Component` at all. It can just be a simple function
&mdash; -- one that takes an input and returns a (portion of) the UI.

So what's this look like? Here's our `TextField` component rendered as a so-called
`functional stateless` component (a feature available in React since v0.14):

```
const defaultLimit = 100
const noop = () => {}

export default function TextField(props) {
	return <input
					 className="field field-light"
					 onChange={this.props.onChange || noop}
					 limit={this.props.limit || defaultLimit} />
}
```
Now isn't that just beautiful? It really is. It's just so concise. We've discarded
all that ugly boilerplate. But it's not only concision that makes this beautiful. 
By transforming our component into a stateless function, we have made our
`TextField` component an extremely stable and predictable part of our application.

The predictability comes from the fact -- and here we can see the influence on
React of the principles of functional programming -- that this function will
always return the same UI output if given the same `props` input. There
are no state variables here that could be set to different values at different
times that might lead the function to return something that we didn't predict.
What we have here, then, is what in functional terms is called a "pure" or
"referentially transparent"  function. Our UI has become just a bit more predictable.
And, as web developers who've worked on the front-end, we know what a boon that
is, don't we?

## Resources
- ["Software Design Patterns"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_design_pattern) (Wikipedia)
- Dan Abramov, ["Presentational and Container Components"](https://medium.com/@dan_abramov/smart-and-dumb-components-7ca2f9a7c7d0#.quaiihhh3)
- [Stateless Functions](https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/reusable-components.html#stateless-functions)

Commit message:

Add reference to lesson pure functions

README.md, after:

# React Presentation Components

In this lesson, we will examine a specific "type" of React component known as a
"presentation" or "presentational" component.

By the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

1. Explain the benefits of presentation components
2. Describe how we can add interactivity to presentational components
   by adding a callback function as a prop
3. Explain how to use stateless functional components

# What makes a component "presentational"?

The answer to this question is, as you may have guessed, is that a presentational
component is a component whose primary responsibility is to render some piece
of the beautiful user interfaces that we get to build as web developers. Their
job, in other words, is to look good!

![I'm So Pretty](https://media.giphy.com/media/oLz0TmduZsUjm/giphy.gif)

There is, however, a bit more thinking that we need to do here, just so we
understand precisely what it means when we say that a component is of the type
"presentational." Very often
when we speak of classes or categories of things in world of programming, the types or
classes that we are discussing are actually formalized in the libraries or
languages themselves. Think, for example, of when we declare a React `Component.`
When we do that we write either `React.createClass()` or (using the ES2015 format)
`class SomeComponent extends Component`. Either way, we are creating an actual
instance of `Component`.

But here's the rub. When we say that some component is "presentational" *we
definitely do not mean* that the component is a formal type or class defined
by the React library. There is no such thing as type `PresentationalComponent`
in the React library. Rather, what we are dealing with here is simply a useful
*convention*, or, better yet, a *programming pattern* that coders who have used
React have found themselves following over and over again as they compose
their component-based React UIs.

So what defines the presentational component pattern? Here's a list
of defining features:
* Presentational components are primarily concerned with how things look;
* they probably only contain a render method;
* they do not know how to load or alter the data that they render;
* they rarely have any internally changeable `state` properties;
* and, they are best written as stateless functional components.

Okay so there's our pattern description. Now let's jump into some code and see
how presentation components actually look in practice.

## Surprise, You've already written presentational components!

Yep, this is true. Think about it. If a presentational component is simply
a component that doesn't know anything about how to get the data it displays,
and is mainly responsible for presentation, then you've been doing this from
the beginning. A simple `HelloWorld` component, for example, is almost
certainly presentational. Let's see if that's right &mdash; we'll even give our
component the ability to take a prop:

```javascript
const HelloWorld = React.createClass({
  render: function() {
    return <div class="hello-world">Hello {this.props.message || 'World' }</div>;
  }
})
```

Okay, so does this fit our pattern? Absolutely, it does. Here is a component
that does nothing but render a piece of our UI; that has no notion of how
to fetch or reload the `message` data that it takes in as a `prop`; that has
no changeable state; and that only contains a render method. So, I think we can 
safely say it's pretty well presentational.

## Okay great, but when would we ever need such a simple component?

Good question! Our `HelloWorld` example is obviously not a very real-world example,
but consider this: let's say we are working on a massive web application, and we'd
 like to standardize as well as place some limits on the characteristics of the 
text inputs used throughout the application's forms.

In this case, we could certainly establish a style guide in our development team
that dictates that all uses of `<input>` use a specific set of CSS classes, defined
in our stylesheets, but this leaves our app open to a lot of human error. People
would have to consistently follow the convention over time. And while we could
certainly add props to our inputs by doing something like this --
`<input className='field' {...props}>` -- we've left the types of props that can
be provided to our inputs wide open.

With React, we can do much better! Consider this `TextField` component:

```javascript
const defaultLimit = 100
const noop = () => {}

export default class TextField extends React.Component {
  render() {
    // Assume that we have the css classes defined elsewhere.
    return <input
             className="field field-light"
             onChange={this.props.onChange || noop}
             maxLength={this.props.limit || defaultLimit} />
  }
}
```

First off, notice that here again, what we have a component that
fits the presentational pattern. It's a simple wrapper around an `<input>`. But
look how powerful it is! This simple wrapper establishes the CSS classes we will
use in one place for every single input used throughout the app. Think of how
easy it would be to change if we later decided we wanted a different look! But
that's not all we've accomplished here. The component also establishes a
straightforward API for all our text fields consisting of an `onChange` callback
-- because in most cases our `<input>`s are going to need to perform some action
when the users type -- and a `limit` for the amount of characters that a user
can enter in the field. So although our presentational component is simple, it
can still have a degree of interactivity through the addition of callbacks.

Now, of course, we can argue about whether wrapping the `<input>` field in this
way is a good idea. After all, `<input>`s are nice simple implementations in their
own right. But providing a component-based interface to text inputs as we have in
the field above is potentially a great win for simplicity in our app. It specifically
defines what we mean by a text input; it does so in a way that arguably covers
the majority of use-cases we can imagine for a simple text input; and it provides
this definition in one place that can be found and updated easily in the future.
Win, win, win. Are we beginning to see the power off presentational components? 
Good.

Now imagine that it's not just the `TextField` that our team has executed
in this way, but say we've also defined a `<Header />` and a `<Footer />`, as
well, of course, as other more unique and customized modules that are still
primarily presentational. Imagine further that we've composed the majority of our
UI out of these simple presentational components -- all of them almost entirely
stateless, all of them designed to do one thing and one thing well: they just
receive `props` from their parent components and render! That's it. They are
simple and beautiful and because they aren't doing much, because they are mostly
stateless, they have a better chance of remaining blissfully bug free!

This is the power and importance of presentational components. They are simple
and they just work. So therefore we should strive to use them as much as possible.

## The "Stateless Functional" Component & "Pure" Functions

What if I told you we can actually make our presentational components even
simpler? Well we can, and here's why: Remember how one of the principles in
our checklist for the presentational component pattern was that the component
(probably) does not have state? Well, if in fact we can create a component
that has no state, that means that our component doesn't even really need to be
a Javascript object of type `Component` at all. It can just be a simple function
&mdash; -- one that takes an input and returns a (portion of) the UI.

So what's this look like? Here's our `TextField` component rendered as a so-called
`functional stateless` component (a feature available in React since v0.14):

```
const defaultLimit = 100
const noop = () => {}

export default function TextField(props) {
	return <input
					 className="field field-light"
					 onChange={this.props.onChange || noop}
					 limit={this.props.limit || defaultLimit} />
}
```
Now isn't that just beautiful? It really is. It's just so concise. We've discarded
all that ugly boilerplate. But it's not only concision that makes this beautiful. 
By transforming our component into a stateless function, we have made our
`TextField` component an extremely stable and predictable part of our application.

The predictability comes from the fact -- and here we can see the influence on
React of the principles of functional programming -- that this function will
always return the same UI output if given the same `props` input. There
are no state variables here that could be set to different values at different
times that might lead the function to return something that we didn't predict.
What we have here, then, is what in functional terms is called a "pure" or
"referentially transparent"  function.  Our UI has become just a bit more predictable.
And, as web developers who've worked on the front-end, we know what a boon that
is, don't we? (To review pure functions at greater length, see
[this lesson](https://github.com/learn-co-curriculum/javascript-pure-functions)
on the theme.)

## Resources
- ["Software Design Patterns"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_design_pattern) (Wikipedia)
- Dan Abramov, ["Presentational and Container Components"](https://medium.com/@dan_abramov/smart-and-dumb-components-7ca2f9a7c7d0#.quaiihhh3)
- [Stateless Functions](https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/reusable-components.html#stateless-functions)
